Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a large and growing problem
with increasing financial and social burdens to the individual,
carers and society. AD affects over 5% of the population
over 60 years and its prevalencedoubles every 5–10 years
above that age.

A definitive diagnosis of AD can only be given following
pathologic examination of the brain, usually at post-mortem.
The disease is pathologically characterised by the presence
of microscopic extracellular neuritic plaques and intracellular
neurofibrillary tangles. AD tangle pathology progresses
from medial temporal lobe structures such as the entorhinal
cortex and hippocampus, to encompass the whole cortex,
whereas plaque pathology is largely cortical and increases
with disease severity. One of the results
of this pathology is cerebral atrophy which can be visualised
using structural MRI. The atrophy
can be seen even at a single time-point, as brain structures in
Alzheimer’s subjects are smaller on average compared with
controls. In addition, loss of tissue volume over time can also
be detected in large regions such as the whole brain
and in smaller temporal areas such as the hippocampus
and entorhinal cortex. This has led to a number of studies
that have suggested that hippocampal atrophy rates may be useful both
diagnostically, and to track disease progression.
Many studies assessing longitudinal hippocampal change
have been reported in the literature. Different methods have been
used to generate these rates of atrophy including automated
and manual techniques. In addition, different
populations of patients have also been included. To the best
of our knowledge, no statistical review of the hippocampal
atrophy rate literature has been conducted to date. Such a
review is required to assess heterogeneity of reported studies,
to better understand how age and disease severity affect
the calculated atrophy rates, and to pool the results from
these studies to more accurately estimate the rate of atrophy
of the hippocampus in AD and matched control groups.
This type of analysis may also be useful in identifying outlier
results where the methodology employed may deserve
critical review. In addition measuring the inter-site variance
in hippocampal atrophy rates may be useful for anyone planning
a multi-site trial, as it may define the level of consistency
to expect in the imaging measures across sites.

Study objective

The objective of this study is to perform a meta-analysis of
hippocampal atrophy rates in patients with AD and matched
controls from studies reported in the peer-reviewed literature.

Methods

The following protocol was employed in the study.

General study inclusion criteria

We aimed to identify all observational and randomised
controlled trials (RCT) where hippocampal volume was measured
on MRI at two or more points in time, and annualised
hippocampal atrophy rate was reported for patients with
AD. We included data from both arms of randomised controlled
trials if symptomatic treatment was given, and only
the placebo arm if a disease-modifying treatment was given
as atrophy rate might have been altered by the treatment.
Disease-modifying treatments were classified as those that
had been shown to significantly alter whole brain atrophy
rates.

We included MRI studies reporting results from patients
with AD of any age or gender. There were no restrictions on
the method used to diagnose AD. As MCI was not a subject
group being formally assessed as part of this meta-analysis,
cognitively impaired subject groups with a mean MMSE
>26 were excluded. No restriction was placed on scanning
protocol, strength of magnet used to image the patients or
segmentation protocol used to determine the atrophy rate.

Unpublished studies were not included, unless accepted
papers had been published ahead of print online, and studies
where the mean annualised rates of atrophy could not
be provided by the author were excluded. Since people with
Down’s syndrome/Alzheimer’s disease and mutation carriers
of the known AD-causing genes may have a different
course of disease, studies based on their populations were
also excluded.

Outcome measure

Mean (arithmetic) atrophy rate specified as % loss of base-
line volume per year.

Search methods for identification of studies

Searches for relevant studies were performed using elec-
tronic and other sources.

Electronic sources

The published literature was searched in MEDLINE (1950
to February Week 2 2007) through OVID using the following
strategy:

(hippocamp$.tw) AND ((EXP magnetic resonance imaging
OR((magnetic AND resonance AND imag$).
tw OR mri$.tw)) AND ((EXP Alzheimer’s Disease/)OR
Alzheimer$.tw))

Abstracts were read for all papers with relevant titles and
full papers obtained and examined for all relevant abstracts.
This search was extended by examining reference lists for
the papers thus identified. Further papers citing these papers
were examined using Web of Science (1985–2007).

Individual searching of journals

In addition the following journals were searched
including Neurology, Annals of Neurology, Archives of
Neurology, Neurobiology of Aging, American Journal of
Neuroradiology, Brain, Cerebral Cortex, Cortex, European
Journal of Neurology, Hippocampus, Journal of Neurology,
Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, Lancet Neurology
, NeuroImage, Neuroradiology, Dementia and
Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease,
American Journal of Alzheimer’s disease and other
dementias, Alzheimer’s Disease and Associated Disorders,
Lancet, PNAS, and Nature.

Personal communication with content experts

The list of published studies generated were shown to
another researcher in this field from a different research group
(LvdP) who checked whether there were any studies that may
have not been included. Once the potential list was finalised
between the two research groups, all authors of the studies
were contacted to ensure that correct information was being
used and any information that was lacking (such as MMSEs,
or mean rates of atrophy) was requested. In addition, the
full list was sent to each author to ensure no other studies
had been missed by the searches. Published studies resulting
from searches that are not in English were to be included
when possible through contact with authors where necessary.

Quality assessment

After studies were selected for the meta-analysis, each
was assessed for quality by tabulating variables which may
introduce bias or explain heterogeneity of the results. These
include: cohorts used (population, case/control, case series),
blinding of raters to patient information, chronology of
scan ordering, drop-out rate if RCT, assessment of and
exclusion criteria for controls, AD diagnostic criteria and
exclusion criteria, white matter damage exclusion criteria,
white matter lesion quantification, apolipoprotein E (APOE)
genotyping, other medications, magnet strength, number of
scanning sites, scan “slice” thickness, hippocampal measurement
method, number of raters, registered images or total
intracranial volume (TIV) corrected, whole hippocampus
measured and reliability of method.

Statistical analysis

STATA Version 9 (Stata Corporation, College Station, TX,
USA) and SAS proc mixed Version 8 (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC, USA) were used for the statistical analysis. From
each study, the mean atrophy rate and standard deviation were
obtained for the AD patients (and separately for controls
where available), together with means and standard deviations
of the ages, MMSEs and inter-scan intervals in each
subject group. Calculation of the standard error required for
meta-analysis was based on the standard deviation and the
number of patients for each study.

Data synthesis (meta-analysis)

A random-effects meta-analysis model was fitted using
restricted maximum likelihood (REML), consistent with the
assumption that mean atrophy rates measured in individual
studies vary around an overall average atrophy rate. The
random-effect for between-study heterogeneity was assumed
to be normally distributed, as were the within-study errors.
In addition, we tested the hypothesis that the random-effects
were needed, by comparing the REML log likelihood ratio
statistic to its asymptotic distribution under the null hypothesis
that the random-effect variance is 0, which is given by a
mixture of two chi-squared distributions.

Since some studies reported results separately for different
subgroups of AD patients, we attempted to fit a
random-effects model that allowed for both between - and
within-study variation. Unfortunately this was not possible,
due to the limited number of studies that reported results separately
by subgroup. In view of this the non-independence of
results from subgroups of the same study was accounted for
through sharing the study-specific random-effect. For studies
containing both a control and an AD group, the mean
difference in atrophy rates between the two groups was calculated.
These differences were then entered in a further
random-effects meta-analysis to estimate the overall mean
within-study difference in rates between AD and control
groups.

Assessment of reporting bias

Due to the focus of this meta-analysis, it is unlikely that
studies would be denied publication on the basis of the
estimated size of mean atrophy in AD patients. However,
publication bias was examined with funnel plots. Funnel plots
graphically demonstrate publication bias: as the precision of
the studies increases, there should be a decrease in the variability
of results leading to a funnel shape. Lack of symmetry
implies evidence of a publication bias.

Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity

Heterogeneity in atrophy rates between studies may be
explained by the mean age or disease severity (MMSE score)
of study participants, or inter-scan interval. This was explored
using the data on AD groups through use of meta-regression. This
meta-regression analysis can only reveal
associations between mean age, MMSE, or scan interval
and mean atrophy rates, rather than revealing associations
between individual ages, MMSEs, or scan intervals and individual
atrophy rates. We added age, MMSE, and scan interval
separately as a linear fixed effect in our random-effects model
to estimate any such associations. It was recognised that estimates
of such effects may be imprecise if only a small number
of studies are available and if between-study variability in
such factors is small.

Sample size calculation

Of the studies included in the meta-analysis, those with
mean scan intervals of 1 year ± 2 months were used to calculated
sample sizes. In these studies there was little variation
in scan interval between patients. We performed a random
effects meta-analysis (on the variance scale) of these studies’
estimated atrophy rate standard deviations, to give a pooled
estimate of the standard deviation. We assumed that a drug
would decrease the atrophy of the hippocampus by a certain
percentage. Standard techniques were used estimate sample
sizes that give 90% statistical power to detect 20 and 50%
reduction in hippocampal atrophy rates (using two-sided significance
test at the 0.05 level).

Results

Our Medline search strategy identified 535 papers, 19 of
which satisfied our inclusion criteria. Eleven of these 19
papers were excluded, because: six presented overlapping
data with the primary report already included, three did
not report annualised atrophy rate and two included patients
with Vascular Dementia. For the eight papers thus identified,
we extended the search by examining reference lists
and Web of Science, which yielded no further papers. Hand
searching and personal communication with content experts
yielded an additional paper that does not contain the word
‘hippocampus’ in its title or abstract. We were also aware
of one study available online ahead of print
at time of searching which replaced owing to overlap of patient
populations. The resulting studies included in this meta-analysis
are displayed in Table 1. The quality of these studies is reported in
Table 2, and those studies that were excluded are detailed in
Table 3.

Data synthesis and heterogeneity

Fig. 1 is a Forest plot demonstrating the results for the AD
subjects from the individual studies included in the metaanalysis
(n = 595). The estimate of the overall mean atrophy
rate in these groups from a random-effects meta-analysis was
4.66% per year (95% CI 3.92, 5.40). The estimate of the
between-study standard deviation was 0.77%. The likelihood
ratio test for the need for the between-study random-effect
was highly statistically significant (p = 0.0001), confirming
that there was strong evidence of between-study heterogeneity.
Fig. 2 is a Forest plot of the matched control
groups (n = 212). The estimated overall mean atrophy rate
in these groups from a random-effects meta-analysis was
1.41% per year (95% CI 0.52, 2.30). The estimate of
between-study standard deviation was 0.74%. The likelihood
ratio test for the presence of between-study heterogeneity
was highly statistically significant (p < 0.0001). Fig. 3
shows the differences between the control and AD groups
in those studies where both groups were studied (six studies
in total). Using data from these studies, and combining
AD subgroups within studies, using a random-effects meta-analysis
the estimated mean difference in atrophy rates
between controls and AD subjects was 3.33% per year
(95% CI 1.73, 4.94). The estimate of between-study standard
deviation in the AD/control difference was 1.28%,
and the likelihood ratio test showed strong evidence for
between-study heterogeneity in AD-control rate differences
(p = 0.002).

Publication bias

Figs. 4 and 5 show funnel plots of AD and AD-control
differences respectively against the standard error of the estimate.
Although few conclusions can be drawn given the small
number of studies, there was no suggestion that studies with
either large or small atrophy rates were more likely to be
published.

Subgroup analysis and meta-regression

Plots of the ADstudy/subgroup mean atrophy rates against
age, MMSE and inter-scan interval are shown in Figs. 6–8,
respectively. There were no apparent relationships between
these variables and mean atrophy rate. An increase of 1 year in
study mean age was associated with a 0.18% (95% CI −0.29,
0.64%) in mean atrophy rate, though this was not statistically
significant (p = 0.24). There was no evidence of an association
between study mean MMSE score and mean atrophy rate,
with a one unit increase in study mean MMSE score being
associated with a reduction in mean atrophy rate of 0.07%
(−0.56to0.70%p = 0.68). Each 1 year increase in mean inter-scan
interval was associated with a 0.45% (95% CI −3.07,
3.97%) increase in mean study atrophy rate, but again this
association was not statistically significant (p = 0.64).

Sample sizes

Four studies were included in sample size calculations
(Barnes et al., 2007b); Fox et al., 2005); (Hashimoto et al.,
2005); and (Jack et al., 2003). For these groups the pooled
mean atrophy rate was 4.51% per year, while the correspond-
ing pooled estimate of the standard deviation of measured
atrophy rates was 3.06%. The estimated numbers of subjects
per treatment arm using these estimates were 242 and 39
subjects for a 20 and 50% reduction in hippocampal atrophy
rates, respectively.

Discussion

This study aimed to estimate the mean rate of hippocampal
atrophy across a number of published studies. In addition,
this study aimed to formally assess some aspects of the heterogeneity
in these studies. Meta-analysis plays an important
role in summarising results from studies owing to
between - study heterogeneity. Effects of confounders such as
disease severity or age may be lessened by pooling results from all
studies, making the results more applicable to the wider population.

Hippocampal rates of atrophy were consistently greater in
AD subjects than controls in all studies included in this
meta-analysis. The pooled mean rates of atrophy were 1.41% in
the control subjects and 4.66% in AD subjects, respectively.
The AD/control differences were significantly different in the
5/7 studies where both controls and AD subjects had been
assessed and reported. The two studies where the differences
were not statistically significant had the largest confidence
intervals. Overall, the pooled mean difference between AD and
control groups was 3.33% and was significantly greater than 0
(Fig. 3). There was a large amount of between-study variability
in both AD rates and control rates. The between-study
variability in

AD/control rate differences was also relatively large, which
cannot be attributed to factors that affect both controls and
ADs in a study, such as scanning protocol. Our results therefore
suggest that there is genuine variation between studies
in AD/control rate difference, possibly as a result of differences
in disease severity between studies. It has been shown
that rates of atrophy can change as the disease progresses.
Other factors such
as concurrent vascular disease may also affect atrophy rates.
Some studies had higher variances that others, this may be
due to the methods employed by these studies or it may
be chance owing to the relatively small numbers within the
subject groups.

Some aspects of the heterogeneity of studies are difficult
to formally assess because certain variables were not reported
(see Table 2). These variables include patient-related information
such as other administered medications and APOE
genetic status. Treatments may be particularly difficult for
case–control or population-based studies to report accurately,
since many of these studies will be conducted at a tertiary
referral centre whereas it may be the general physician at
the primary level who prescribes and monitors the administration
of medication. Another example of the differences
in reporting in studies is reliability of segmentation technique.
Most studies did report reliability, however the results
are largely incomparable in most cases since the measures
were performed on different numbers of subjects, and with
different numbers of repetitions and in some cases with
same scanning acquisitions and others with different scanning
acquisitions.

Other scan parameters and hippocampal delineation methods
may also affect the measured atrophy rates such as scan
“slice” thickness or segmentation protocol. Differences in
anatomical structures included in the delineation of hippocampi
may not have substantial effects on the atrophy
rate determined if the same protocol is used for both baseline
and follow-up scans. Data from centres using different
delineation protocols would only agree if rates of atrophy
were similar in separate anatomical locations within the hippocampus
(for example, rate of atrophy of the hippocampal
tail is similar to the hippocampal head). Meta-analysis on
the AD-control differences should be robust to these potential
confounders since the hippocampal rates determined in
both subject groups should have been determined in the same
way.

Formal meta-regression analyses showed no significant
associations between mean atrophy rates quoted in the studies
included in the meta-analysis, and age, MMSE and interval.
However, it may be that these relationships do exist;
meta-regression can detect such associations only if there
is sufficient variability in the explanatory variable between
studies. There was little variability in mean age between
studies relative to within studies, perhaps explaining the lack
of association with age. A number of studies (not included
here) have examined rates of hippocampal atrophy in normal
ageing and have shown that age does influence hippocampal
atrophy rates in “healthy controls”.
There was some variability in mean MMSE score between
studies however this was not sufficient to show any potential
association between this variable and rates of atrophy.
Most AD subjects included in the studies were mild to moderately
affected, perhaps because of the need to comply with
imaging; as a result 11 of the 12 AD groups included had a
mean MMSE between 17 and 22 (one group had an MMSE
of 25.7); this lack of variability in mean MMSE reduced the
chance of finding an association. There was no evidence of
an association between mean interval and mean atrophy rate,
despite relatively large variation in mean interval between
scans and between studies.

Sample sizes were estimated using data from 432 subjects
which is an estimate based on a greater number of subjects
than previously reported. Compared with other brain regions
reported for a similar interval, a greater number of subjects
were required for hippocampal atrophy rates than required
for whole brain, or ventricular atrophy rates (approximately
150 subjects required per treatment arm for either brain atrophy
or ventricular enlargement for 20% reduction in atrophy
rates, n = 38). However, it may be that
disease-specific effects require investigation, and therefore
hippocampal atrophy rates, or temporal horn enlargement
may be of interest in clinical trials. The 39 subjects estimated
for a 50% reduction in atrophy rates were similar to, but
lower than, the numbers required for temporal horn enlargement
(number required per treatment arm = 65, n = 192).

This study has a number of limitations. Although this
meta-analysis attempted to include as many studies as possible
and there was no evidence of publication bias, only nine
studies analysed owing to a number of reasons (see Table 3).
Larger numbers of studies would allow a more precise estimate
of the mean rates to be calculated and for associated
meta-regression analyses to be more robust. Collating the
individual patient data from these studies would enable much
more precise estimation of relationships between factors such
as age and disease severity with hippocampal atrophy rates.
Associations using individual patient data within studies
would not be confounded by study-level factors, such as scan
acquisition protocols and methods to determine hippocampal
atrophy rate. Also, variability both within and between
studies could be used to estimate these associations more precisely.
In addition, standard meta-analysis techniques assume
that the precision of individual study estimates are known
(assumed to be the estimated value). When some contributing
studies are small, as in our meta-analysis, this assumption
may not be reasonable. Consequently, our reported confidence
intervals may be too narrow.

Because some specific study variables were not reported
consistently (see Table 2), and this was an impediment to
meta-analysis, we suggest that new studies explicitly report
the following information (including presence or lack of
information) as part of the subject demographics, scanning,
and hippocampal atrophy methods:

Subject demographics

Cohort: population/case/control/case series
Age
Gender: % male/n male
APOE genotype: % E4/n E4
Neuropsychology: MMSE
AD diagnostic criteria: which used (imaging used in diag-
nosis?)
AD exclusion criteria
Symptomatic/disease modifying treatments
Drop-out rate if RCT
Details of clinical assessment of controls
Exclusion criteria for control group
Post-mortem confirmation of disease

Imaging

Magnetic field strength (Tesla)
Number of scanning sites
Acquisition protocol: full details including “slice” thickness
(mm)

Post-processing of scans

Region measurement method: manual/automated
Number of raters
Measurement on registered scans or TIV-corrected scans
Details of anatomy included in the segmentation
Intra-rater segmentation reliability using ICC (preferably
quote statistics based on 10 subjects segmented twice by
the same rater)
Blinding of raters to diagnosis
Blinding of raters to order of scans

Conclusions

The overall hippocampal atrophy rate is 1.4% in normal
controls with the range of the quoted mean age being 69–83
years. In AD subjects the overall atrophy rate is 4.6%.