Background:While most patients with mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) transition to Alzheimer disease (AD),
others develop non-AD dementia, remain in the MCI state,
or improve.

Objective:To test the following hypotheses: smaller hippocampal
volumes predict conversion of MCI to AD,
whereas larger hippocampal volumes predict cognitive
stability and/or improvement; and patients with MCI who
convert to AD have greater atrophy in the CA1 hippocampal
subfield and subiculum.

Design:Prospective longitudinal cohort study.

Setting:University of California–Los Angeles Alzheimer’s
Disease Research Center.

Patients:We followed up 20 MCI subjects clinically and
neuropsychologically for 3 years.

Main Outcome Measure:Baseline regional hippocampal
2atrophy was analyzed with region-of-interest and
3-dimensional hippocampal mapping techniques.

Results:During the 3-year study, 6 patients developed
AD (MCI-c), 7 remained stable (MCI-nc), and 7
improved (MCI-i). Patients with MCI-c had 9% smaller
left and 13% smaller right mean hippocampal volumes
compared with MCI-nc patients. Radial atrophy maps
showed greater atrophy of the CA1 subregion in MCI-c.
Patients with MCI-c had significantly smaller hippocampi
than MCI-i patients (left, 24%; right, 27%). Volumetric
analyses showed a trend for greater hippocampal
atrophy in MCI-nc relative to MCI-i patients (eg, 16%
volume loss). After permutation tests corrected for multiple
comparison, the atrophy maps showed a significant
difference on the right. Subicular differences were seen
between MCI-c and MCI-i patients, and MCI-nc and
MCI-i patients. Multiple linear regression analysis confirmed
the group effect to be highly significant and independent of age,
hemisphere, and Mini-Mental State
Examination scores at baseline.

Conclusions:Smaller hippocampi and specifically CA1 and subicular
involvement are associated with increased risk for conversion from
MCI to AD. Patients with MCI-i tend to have larger hippocampal volumes
and relative preservation of both the subiculum and CA1.



Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is an intermediate cognitive
state between normal aging and dementia. Patients with amnestic
MCI have memory decline while still enjoying functional
lifestyles. Most patients with amnestic MCI transition to
Alzheimer disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies, or
vascular dementia, but some remain stable and others
improve. Reversible MCI may be due to depression,
adverse effects of medication, hormonal changes, or nonneurological
conditions severe enough to affect cognition. Any
improvement in our ability to predict the
outcome of MCI would be invaluable for
counseling patients, making therapeutic decisions, and planning
clinical trials.

Most amnestic MCI patients have AD pathology. In AD the pathology
typically appears first in the entorhinal cortex, followed by
the hippocampus and later the neocortex. Hippocampal atrophy
correlates strongly with Braak and Braak
pathological staging8,9and cognitive decline, and predates
conversion to MCI in the oldest old (>= 85 years).
The MCI outcomes correlate with annualized hippocampal atrophy rates.
The annual atrophy rates for those who remain stable (MCI-nc) is
2.8% and for those who develop AD (MCI-c) is 3.7%. The latter
is strikingly similar to the 3.5% to 4.0% observed in AD. Some
researchers have found an association between smaller hippocampi
and the observed annual conversion rate from MCI to AD, whereas

others have not. Variable conversion rates, MCI sample
heterogeneity, and variability in hippocampal volume may
partly explain these conflicting results.
We analyzed hippocampal atrophy in MCI with a region-of-interest
technique and a new hippocampal 3-dimensional (3-D) radial atrophy
mapping approach assessing for subregional structural deformations. The
technique has proved sensitive and reliable in several neurodegenerative,
developmental, and psychiatric disorders, as well as in normal brain
development and temporal lobe epilepsy.

PATIENTS

All subjects were prospectively recruited at the University of
California–Los Angeles Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center according
to the restrictions and policies of the university’s institutional review
board. We prospectively followed 20 amnestic MCI subjects prospectively for 
3 years with detailed clinical and
neuropsychological examinations. We used the following inclusion
criteria: age 55 to 90 years, cognitive complaint, memory decline of
at least 1.5 SD below the age - and education - adjusted neuropsychological norms
on at least 1 memory test (California Verbal Learning Test,
second edition; Wechsler Memory Scale, third edition, logical
memory and visual reproduction subtests; and Rey-Osterrieth Complex
Figure delayed recall test), intact activities of daily living, no
evidence of concurrent medical condition of sufficient severity to
have an impact on cognition, no history of drug or alcohol abuse, and no
concurrent psychiatric orother neurological illness. Patients
under went evaluation for depression with the Geriatric Depression
Scale. Those who were clinically depressed (Geriatric Depression
Scale score, >10), who had conditions precluding safe performance
of magnetic resonance imaging, or who had baseline images acquired
more than 6 months from the date of neuropsychological evaluation were excluded.

CLINICAL OUTCOME MEASURES

Three primary outcomes were defined:conversion to AD(MCI-c)
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
forth edition and the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative
Disorders and Stroke–Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association
criteria; cognitive improvement where patients no longer met criteria for
MCI(MCIi); and cognitive stability where they remained in the MCI category
during the 3 years of follow-up (MCI-nc). Diagnosis was
determined by consensus decision among neurologists, psychiatrists, and
neuropsychologists who reviewed all available clinical and neuropsychological
information.

IMAGING DATA ACQUISITION AND ANALYSIS

Imaging data were collected on a 1.5-T Signa magnetic resonance imaging scanner
(GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wis) with the following protocol: 3-D spoiled
gradient coronal acquisition perpendicular to the long axis of the hippocampus,
repetition time, 28 milliseconds; echo time, 6 milliseconds; field of view, 220 mm;
 256x192 matrix; and slice thickness, 1.5 mm.
Magnetic resonance images weres caled to match the ICBM53 (International Consortium
for Brain Mapping) average brain imaging template using a 9-parameter linear
transformation. Image nonuniformities due to magnetic field inhomogeneities were
eliminated. Hippocampi were traced on contiguous coronal slices following a
detailed, well-established protocol with high intrarater
and interrater reliability.33When boundaries were ambiguous, a
standard neuroanatomical atlas was consulted.34Tracings included the hippocampus
proper, dentate gyrus, and subiculum.
All traces were made in a blinded fashion with respect to the subjects’ age, sex,
and cognitive outcome. Region-of-interest volumetric data were extracted and
analyzed statistically.

The hippocampal contours were split into top and bottom
components and transformed into 3-D parametric surface mesh
models with normalized spatial frequency of the surface points
within and across brain slices. This step ensures precise comparison of
anatomy between subjects and groups at each hippocampal surface point.
For each outcome group, we performed group averaging of hippocampal
representations and recorded the variation between corresponding surface
points.
A medial core (central line threading down the long axis of the
hippocampus) was computed for each hippocampus. Hippocampal radial distance
measures (ie, the distance from the medial core to each point on the
hippocampal surface model) were estimated. These values were used to generate
individual distance maps that were combined across subjects to produce group
average distance maps for comparing surface morphology between the groups.
Figure 1 summarizes these methods. The

California Verbal Learning Test delayed recall scores were used
as covariates to generate 3-D maps of cognitive correlations with
atrophy.

STATISTICAL ANALYSES

The region-of-interest volumetric data were globally assessed
for group effects using analysis of variance. Each group pair
was first compared using the 2-sample t test with pooled variances, followed by a Tukey test correcting for multiple comparisons. Multiple linear
regression analyses were performed controlling for group, age, and
Mini-Mental State Examination score at baseline. The radial atrophy
significance maps were subjected to permutation-based statistics using a
threshold of P<.01 to ensure that the overall pattern of effects in the
surface-based maps could not have been observed by chance
alone.

RESULTS

PRIMARY OUTCOME

Of the 20 MCI patients, 6 converted to AD (MCI-c), 7 remained stable
(MCI-nc), and 7 improved (MCI-i). Demographic data are shown inTable 1.
The follow-up Mini-Mental State Examination score after 3 years was
significantly lower in MCI-c relative to MCI-i patients. The change in
Mini-Mental State Examination score, over the 3-year follow-up interval,
did not show a significant correlation with hippocampal volumes assessed
at baseline (left side, r=−0.26, P=.26; right side, r=−0.33, P=.15).
These results did not change after stratification by MCI subgroup.

REGION-OF-INTEREST VOLUMETRIC ANALYSES

We found a significant group effect for the hippocampal volumes in our
MCI cohort using analysis of variance (left side, R2=42%, F=6.06, P=.01;
right side, R2=45%, F=4.6, P=.006). A multiple linear regression model
with hippocampal volume as the dependent variable and age,
group, and Mini-Mental State Examination score at baseline as the
predictor variables was significant bilaterally
(left side, F=6.05, P=.006; right side, F=4.61, P=.02). Of
these predictors, only group membership was significantly associated
with hippocampal volume (left side,
t=4.06, P<.001; right side, t=3.49, P=.003).

Two-sample t-test statistics with pooled variance
showed significant differences between MCI-c and MCI-nc
patients in the left hippocampal volume and a trend for
significance on the right. Significant bilateral differences were found
between MCI-c and MCI-i patients. After correction for multiple comparisons,
the MCI-c vs MCI-i volume differences remained significant, whereas
the MCI-nc vs MCI-i differences showed a trend for significance (Table 2).

RADIAL ATROPHY MAP

To better understand the anatomical distribution of radial
atrophy, we consulted 2 well-established sources and
demarcated the main hippocampal subfields on the hippocampal surface
(Figure 2A). Statistical maps comparing the individual groups are shown
in Figure 2B-D. We subjected the maps to stringent multiple comparisons
using permutation testing at a threshold of P<.01. The MCI-c
and MCI-nc patients differed in the extent of involvement
of the CA1 hippocampal subregion. The MCI-nc patients
had significantly greater atrophy in the subicular region of
the left and the CA1 region of the right hippocampus relative to MCI-i patients.
The MCI-c patients showed significantly greater CA1 and subicular
involvement relative toMCI-i patients bilaterally. The CA2 and CA3
subfields showed no significant group differences (Table 3).

COGNITIVE CORRELATIONS

Figure 3depicts 3-D statistical maps correlating the delayed recall
score on the California Verbal Learning Test
with hippocampal radial atrophy. The strongest correlations
were seen (or observed) for the lateral and ventral hippocampal
surfaces (CA1 and subiculum).

COMMENT

MCI-c showed a distinct pattern of hippocampal atrophy from MCI-nc
and MCI-i. The magnetic resonance
imaging preconversion difference at baseline is atrophy
of the lateral edge of the hippocampal formation, possibly
corresponding to the CA1 subfield. The baseline magnetic resonance
imaging preconversion difference is atrophy
of the lateral edge of the hippocampal formation,
possibly corresponding to the CA1 subfield. As we expected,
the CA2 and CA3 subfields did not show differences between the 3
groups, although a larger sample may
be needed to detect subtle differences. The CA1 hippocampal
subfield is particularly susceptible to neuronal
loss in early AD. One recent study demonstrated preferential
CAI and subicular atrophy, and relative sparing
of CA2, CA3, and CA4 subfields in the earliest pathologic
AD stages (Braak states I-III).
Using a computational anatomy approach similar to
ours, Wang et al and Csernansky et al compared hippocampal
volume and shape between subjects with
mild AD (Clinical Dementia Rating Scale score, 0.5)
and age-matched control subjects. Their hippocampal
deformation maps accurately distinguished subjects
with AD from healthy controls. The AD group had
lateral-edge atrophy in regions corresponding to the
CA1 hippocampal subfield at baseline with spread to
the hippocampal head at follow-up. Further extending
their work, we found greater CA1 involvement in MCI
patients who later developed AD. We found strong correlations
between greater atrophy and verbal memory performance.

Some studies find that a proportion of MCI subjects
revert back to normal cognition when followed up longitudinally.
To our knowledge, ours is the first imaging
study that includes the whole spectrum of clinical outcomes
of cognitive worsening, improvement, and stability.
Patients with reversible MCI seem to have CA1 and
subicular sparing and larger hippocampal volumes at baseline.
The precise etiology for the amnestic syndrome in
our MCI-i patients remains obscure as we excluded patients
with depression or any other illness that could contribute
to cognitive decline. Future studies focusing on
MCI-i will help clarify its etiology.

Our study has several limitations. Despite the small
sample size, we were able to demonstrate significant morphological
differences between the groups. A larger MCI
patient sample will better define hippocampal regions that
correlate best with cognitive outcomes and determine the
specificity and sensitivity of our methods in predicting
cognitive outcome in patients with newly diagnosed MCI. Without
direct pathological validation, the interpretation of the
subregional involvement remains arbitrary. The subregional
boundaries we used are similar to those proposed
by other research groups.42,43Nevertheless, what we interpret
as CA1 or subicular involvement may reflect changes
in another hippocampal subregion. Our study focused on
amnestic MCI. Our findings cannot be generalized to all
MCI patients, especially to those with the nonamnestic subtype.
A large prospective study that follows up patients with
all MCI subtypes over time is needed to address the etiological,
clinical, and prognostic questions that remain unanswered.