Introduction

Manual segmentation is the gold standard for segmenting
the hippocampus on magnetic resonance images (MRI), typically
in the coronal view, using either an acquisition resliced
perpendicularly to the long axes of the hippocampus, or to
the line connecting the anterior and posterior commissures
(AC-PC line). Orientation along the hippocampal axes was
long preferred by segmenting neuroanatomists since it was
believed to provide better clear-cut boundaries due to
less partial volume effect through the hippocampal body.
More recent

protocols, however, made an increased use of AC-PC oriented
images, in order to take advantage of automated software
for image preprocessing, able to reorient the images perpendicular
to the AC-PC line. The disadvantage of greater partial
volume effect is in this case counterbalanced by the minimal
human effort required in the automated preprocessing phase.

In the context of the Harmonized Protocol Project, which
aims to establish an international protocol for manual segmentation
of the hippocampus, our objective was to assess differences
in measurement reliability for manual segmentations along either
the AC-PC or hippocampal axes, in order to allow a Delphi
panel of experts to take evidence-based decisions for the definition
of the optimal MRI orientation.

Methods

We recruited three expert tracers based on both expertise and
balanced bias for a specific orientation (LA with greater practice
on AC-PC; GP on hippocampal axes; and MBocch with similar
practice in both orientations). MRI were taken from the dataset
ADNI (Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative), a project
launched in 2003 by the National Institute on Aging (NIA),
the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering
(NIBIB), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), private
pharmaceutical companies and non-profit organizations, with
the primary goal to test whether serial MRI, positron emission
tomography (PET), other biological markers, and clinical
and neuropsychological assessment can be combined to measure
the progression of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and
early Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (see also the Acknowledgements
section).

MRIs were selected semi-randomly for 10 subjects from the
ADNI dataset (adni.loni.ucla.edu) as follows: two subjects per
each of five degrees on Scheltens’ medial temporal lobe atrophy
scale.15The tracers segmented all hippocampi twice, once on
images oriented along the AC-PC line, once on images oriented
along the hippocampal axes.

Preprocessing

We downloaded source images in the MINC format from the
ADNI database. We oriented MRIs along the AC-PC and the
hippocampal axes planes on the sagittal plane, through a rigid
body transformation (six degrees of freedom). We used ImageJ
(http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/index.html) to orient images along
hippocampal axes (mean inclination among right and left hippocampi),
and the Montreal Neurological Institute package AutoReg
(version 0.98v) (www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca) to orient images
along the AC-PC line, with the Institute’s ICBM152 nonlinear
symmetric template as reference.

Resampling was carried out with a linear transformation in
AutoReg, and with a bilinear transformation with ImageJ.

Hippocampal Segmentation

Tracers were blinded to MTA score. Images oriented along
AC-PC and hippocampal axes were presented in random order.
Segmentations were carried out from rostral to caudal
on the coronal resampled 1 mm thick images using MultiTracer
(http://www.loni.ucla.edu/Software/MultiTracer), following
the Harmonized Protocol landmarks described in Ref. 16.

We computed hippocampal volumes using MultiTracer by
summing up the sub-volumes resulting from the multiplication
of the segmented area by slice thickness using the “Frust Volume”
computation.

Statistics

We estimated volume intrarater reliability by computing intraclass
correlation coefficients (ICCs) between segmentations on
the AC-PC and on hippocampal axes, and computing interrater
reliability separately for AC-PC and hippocampal axesoriented
images. We computed these interrater ICCs according
to a two-ways random effects model, with both images and tracers
as random factors. Since the aim was to measure how far
from identical scores were raters and methods (orientation),
the most restrictive type (absolute agreement) of ICC was used
instead of simple consistency. The statistical analysis was conducted
using SPSS 12.0.
We computed the spatial overlapping among three tracers
with the formula:

Similarity Coefficient =
3(A ∩ B ∩ C)
(|A| + |B| + |C|)

where |A| is the set of voxels of the segmented region A. This
formula was adapted from Dice’s similarity coefficient.
We computed differences among overlapping coefficients
on both axes with the Wilcoxon non-parametric test for repeated
measures separately for the left and right hippocampi.
We used non parametric statistics (χ2and Kruskall-Wallis) for
the analysis of socio-demographic features of the ADNI subjects
whose MRI was selected for this study.

Results

Scans were taken from subjects with homogeneous age (range:
69-85), gender, diagnoses, education, ApoE ε4 status, and
scanner manufacturer, across the different medial temporal
lobe atrophy degrees of severity (see Supporting Material,
Table S1).

Intrarater ICCs for the three tracers, computed between the
AC-PC and the hippocampal axes segmentations of the same
subjects, were .99 (CI 95%: .96-1, CI 95%), .98 (.94-1) and .95
(.83-.99) for the left, and .99 (.97-1), .99 (.96-1) and .97
(.88-.99) for the right hippocampus. Interrater ICCs were higher
(and the confidence intervals narrower) for AC-PC (left: .94,
.79-.98 CI 95%; right: .94, .81-.99) than on hippocampal axes
oriented scans (left: .87, .41-.97, right: .91, .53-.98) (see crude
hippocampal volumes on Supporting Material, Table S2).
Similarity coefficients among three tracers were consistently
.78 (SD: .03) for both left and right on AC-PC
oriented scans, and .76 (SD: .03) and .75 (SD: .02) respectively
for left and right on hippocampal axes oriented scans
(Figure 1, box plots on the left). The difference between similarity
coefficients were always in favour of AC-PC oriented
scans (Figure 1, right panel) (Wilcoxon test exact P = .002
for the left and right). Similarity coefficients among the three
tracers for each hippocampus on the two orientations can be
found in Table S3 (Supporting material,/centroalzheimer.it/
public/MB/SOPs/PaperCheck4Axes/03 Supplementary.doc).

Top and middle panels: Box-plots of similarity coefficients.
Upper and lower box boundaries: 25th and 75th percentiles of
the distribution. Red line: median. Red star: mean. Whiskers:
most extreme data points.

Bottom panel: Difference of similarity coefficient (AC-PC
minus hippocampal-axes). Values above the red line indicate
higher concordance on AC-PC oriented images. X axis values
denote scan number.

Discussion

Hippocampal segmentations based on harmonized landmarks,
carried out by three expert tracers from independent centres on
AC-PC and hippocampal axes oriented scans, were all characterized
by very high volume ICCs, but we detected significantly
higher spatial overlap for segmentations completed on the
AC-PC oriented scans.

We examined individually hippocampal contours produced
by the three tracers in order to detect possible causes that could
account for this difference. The largest differences among tracers,
occurring especially on the hippocampal axes orientation,
could be attributed to the segmentation of the head, at the level
of the boundary with the amygdala. The comparison through
3D navigation of the boundary area between the hippocampus
and the amygdala on scans oriented on the AC-PC and on
hippocampal axes enables an appreciation of more informative
details on the former, consisting in better visualization of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spaces, more clearly separating the two
structures than in the visualization on the hippocampal axes
(Figure 2).

Minor regions of heterogeneity between tracers were identified
on the tail end. These were equally observed on the AC-PC
and on the hippocampal axes oriented images (see as examples
Figure S1 in Supporting material at /centroalzheimer.it/
public/MB/SOPs/PaperCheck4Axes/03 Supplementary.doc),
and the movies (see captions in Supporting material) available
at:

http://www.centroalzheimer.it/public/MB/SOPs/
PaperCheck4Axes/Subject_09_worseAxis_Right.mov
http://www.centroalzheimer.it/public/MB/SOPs/
PaperCheck4Axes/Subject_09_worseACPC_Left.mov
http://www.centroalzheimer.it/public/MB/SOPs/
PaperCheck4Axes/Subject_04_bestAxis_Left.mov
http://www.centroalzheimer.it/public/MB/SOPs/
PaperCheck4Axes/Subject_03_bestACPC_Right.mov).

Although the AC-PC orientation seemed to provide more
detailed information for correct and reliable separation of the
hippocampus from adjacent structures, and particularly from
the amygdala from our image analysis, we cannot exclude that
the wider practice in examining brain structures on the standard
AC-PC oriented images of the brain, as they are reported on any
atlas, may also have influenced the tracers’ performance. This is
in turn consistent with the convenience of setting standard operating
procedures to facilitate reliability of measurements and
of being consistent with other available standard procedures.

Volumetric ICCs were very high, although tracers came
from different centers. We believe that this reliability may
be a consequence of the extremely detailed description of
landmarks provided within the Harmonized Protocol
project (www.hippocampal-protocol.net).

We did not compute proper intrarater values separately for
the AC-PC and the hippocampal axes orientations, but only
a proxy, by considering segmentations carried out on the two
orientations of the same images. Although separate intraraters
for the two orientations would have been preferable, it is possible
that a ceiling effect of these very experienced tracers would
have hidden a difference due to orientation, while interrater values
are more liable to the effect of confounders like orientation.
This is especially plausible considering that we used the “absolute”
method for ICCs computations, which is more restrictive
than the most common “consistency” method.

We are not aware of previous studies trying to quantify the
differences of reliability in hippocampal segmentation on images
oriented along different axes. The need to carry out this
kind of investigation arose from the need to define a Harmonized
Protocol for hippocampal segmentation, to set a standardized
operating procedure in the use of hippocampal volumetry
as a biomarker for AD.

As the next step of this project, the quantitative data described
here were used to inform the Delphi panel of experts16
to decide on the optimal orientation of MRIs for a Harmonized
Protocol for hippocampal segmentation. Indeed, based
on the described data the Delphi panel achieved a significant
agreement for the AC-PC orientation. This decision, that will
be described in detail elsewhere, is also nicely consistent with
the current standard orientation of the brain in different settings,
from neuropathology to atlas representations. Moreover,
the sources of heterogeneity in segmentations observed in this
phase have been used to further improve landmarks descriptions
and instructions that were defined in the Harmonized
Protocol.
All updates of the project can be found at
www.hippocampal-protocol.net.
