Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is characterized
by fluctuating cognitive impairment, persistent visual
hallucinosis, and parkinsonism. It is the second
most common form of degenerative dementia and
may account for up to 20% of cases of late-life dementia.
Ante mortem diagnosis of DLB and its differentiation
from other common forms of late-onset
dementias, particularly AD and vascular dementia
(VaD), is important for a number of reasons. Some
patients with DLB may have an accelerated disease
progression and approximately 50% of subjects experience
life-threatening adverse reactions to antipsychotic
medications (neuroleptic sensitivity). In
contrast, subjects with DLB may have an enhanced
therapeutic response to treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors.

Volumetric MRI may provide important supplementary
information that could support or counter a
clinical diagnosis of DLB. A recent volumetric study
and initial work from our group indicate that there
may be less atrophy of temporal lobe structures on
MRI in DLB compared with AD. Information regarding
other structural features that may differentiate DLB
from AD are inconclusive and there has been no detailed
volumetric comparison of DLB and VaD to date.
A number of recent studies reported an association
between the APOE-e4 genotype and specific morphologic
changes identified on neuroimaging in
subjects with AD. No consistent link has been
identified, and the relationship between volumetric
indices on MRI and APOE-e4 status in DLB has not
been characterized.
The purpose of this study was to compare the extent
of global and regional atrophy on MRI in patients
with DLB, AD, and VaD, and age-comparable
normal control subjects. We also examined the relationship
between APOE-e4 status and volumetric indices in these
subjects. We hypothesized that
subjects with DLB would have less temporal lobe
atrophy than those with AD and VaD.

Methods

Recruitment of subjects.Seventy-six subjects
over age 60 years who fulfilled Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (DSM- IV) criteria
for dementia were recruited from a community dwelling
population of patients with an informant in
regular contact. Seventy-two of these subjects were prospectively
chosen from a clinical case register of consecutive
referrals to old age psychiatry services. All potential
subjects on the register (n = 199) were assessed for their
suitability to take part in the study: whether they met the
entry criteria; could give consent and were willing to take
part in the study; could cooperate and tolerate having an
MRI scan; and exhibited the absence of medical contraindications
for MRI. An additional four subjects were recruited
from a specialist dementia clinic. Twenty-six age-matched
controls were recruited from among spouses and friends of
dementia subjects. The local ethics committee approved
the research and all subjects, as well as the nearest relative
for patients, gave informed consent after the nature of
the procedures had been fully explained.

Assessments and diagnosis

All dementia subjects
were assessed as previously described. Cognitive function
was measured using the Cambridge Cognitive Examination
(CAMCOG), which incorporates the Mini-Mental
State Examination (MMSE), within 3 months of the MRI
scan. Depressive symptoms were also rated using the
Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS).
Standardized clinical diagnostic criteria were used to
characterize the type of dementia. Diagnosis of AD, VaD,
and DLB were made in accordance with National Institute
of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/
Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association,
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke/
Association International pour la Recherche el l’ Enseigne-
ment en Neuroscience,18and DLB consensus criteria1by
consensus agreement between three experienced raters
(J.O., C.B., I.M.). Diagnosis was made blind to MRI scan
findings. Pathologic confirmation of diagnosis has since
been acquired in seven patients.

Subjects with dementia. The total sample size consisted
of 27 subjects with consensus criteria DLB (probable
in 26, possible in 1, with autopsy confirmation in 4), 25
subjects with NINCDS/ADRDA AD (definite in 3, probable
in 21, and possible in 1) and 24 subjects with National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke/AIREN
VaD (probable in 14 and possible in 10). Subject characteristics
are summarized in table 1.

Normal control subjects. Control subjects were recruited
after a detailed assessment to exclude evidence of
dementia (from history or score <80 on the CAMCOG),
depression (from history or score >10 on the MADRS), and
a history of any other significant neurologic, physical, or
psychiatric disorder including drug and alcohol abuse.

MRI scan acquisition. All scans were performed on a
1.0-tesla Siemens Magnetom Impact Expert MRI Scanner
(SiemensMedical,Munich/Erlangen,Germany).T1-weighted
three-dimensional MPRAGE (magnetization-
prepared rapid-acquisition gradient echo) turbo flash
sagittal sequence was used to acquire whole-brain images
(repetition time = 11.4 msec, time to echo = 4.4 msec,
inversion time = 400 msec, time delay = 50 msec, matrix
256 x 256, slice thickness = 1 mm). Standard head positioning
was used.

Analysis of regions of interest. Images were transferred
to a workstation (SPARCSTATION, Tatung, Telford, UK) and
analyzed using ANALYZE software19
(Version 7.5.5, Mayo Foundation, Rochester, MN). The
data were first reformatted into coronal slices perpendicular
to the long axis of the left hippocampus (slice thickness = 1 mm,
cubic voxels of 1 mm), correcting for any
malalignment when necessary.

Six regions of interest (ROI) were measured: two indices
of global atrophy, whole-brain and ventricular volumes;
two indices of lobar atrophy, frontal and temporal lobe
volumes; and two indices of medial temporal atrophy, hippocampal
and amygdala volumes. The right and left sides
of bilateral ROIs were measured on each slice in accordance
with the anatomic boundaries described below (in
mm3). CSF spaces were excluded from all parenchymal
measurements. To control for variation in head size, volume
for each ROI were normalized to the midsagittal intracranial
area. Final volumes were expressed as a
normalized ratio (units mm3/mm2).

All ROIs, except whole-brain volumes, were measured
sequentially, slice-by-slice (1 mm). The frontal lobes, temporal
lobes, and ventricles were measured using a combination thresholding
(between CSF and brain) and automatic edge-finding techniques.
The hippocampus, amygdala, and intracranial area were manually
traced using a mouse-driven cursor. Whole-brain volumes were determined
using a semiautomated segmentation process.

The same trained rater (R.B.) conducted all measurements
blind to diagnosis. Intrarater reliability was assessed
by measuring seven subjects on three occasions.
The mean coefficient of variation for the volumetric indices
was between 1% and 4%.

Anatomic borders of regions of interest. Whole-brain
volume was measured from above the level of the foramen
magnum. Ventricular volume (lateral and third ventricles)
was measured across the entire length and defined by the
CSF–brain boundary. Frontal lobes were measured from
the first cortical gyrus to the slice anterior to the optic
chiasm using in accordance with previous studies. The
average length measured (equivalent to the number of
slices) was 43.6 mm (SD = 3.4).

Temporal lobes were measured throughout their length
from the first cortical gyrus rostrally to the slice showing
the longest length of fornix separating from the hippocampus
caudally. The average length measured was 66.3 mm
(SD = 2.9).

Standard anatomic boundaries were used to define the
hippocampus. The measurement included the hippocampus
proper, dentate gyrus, subicular complex,
alveus, and fimbria. The hippocampus was measured from
the first slice identifying the head to the slice showing the

longest length of fornix. The average length measured
was 38.1 mm (SD = 2.6). In two subjects with AD and four
with VaD, the hippocampus could not be reliably identified
due to movement artifacts.

The anatomic boundaries of the amygdala were defined
according to standard criteria. The anterior margin was
arbitrarily defined from the first slice at the closure of the
lateral sulcus. The average length measured was 13.6 mm
(SD = 1.8). In six subjects with AD and five with VaD, the
amygdala could not be reliably identified due to movement
artifacts.

Determination of APOE genotype.Genomic DNA was
isolated from whole blood and APOE genotypes were deter-
mined using standard PCR.

Statistical analysis. The statistical package SPSS for
Windows (release 7.5; SPSS, Chicago, IL) was used for
data analysis. Volumetric comparisons were made using
the normalized ratio (volume of structure in mm3divided
by midsagittal intracranial area in mm2). Differences between
diagnostic groups on volumetric indices were assessed
using analysis of variance adjusting for MMSE
score, followed by post hoc Scheffe test to correct for multiple
comparisons. Linear regression was used to explore the
relationship between volumetric findings, diagnosis, and
variables which may influence brain size. Independent
Student’s t-tests were used to examine volume differences
between subjects with and without APOE-e4 allele. For
nonparametric data, Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance
was used. (All statistical tests were two-tailed and re-
garded as significant at p < 0.05.)

Results. As shown in table 1, groups were comparable
for age, gender (x2 = 6.7, df = 3, p = 0.08), length of
history and years of education. Ninety-five percent of subjects
were right-hand dominant with no group differences.
As would be expected, CAMCOG and MMSE scores were
lower in all dementia groups compared with control subjects
( p < 0.001). Subjects with DLB were more impaired
than those with VaD on MMSE (13.8 versus 18.4; p < 0.05)
and CAMCOG (47.3 versus 62.5; p < 0.05) scores.

Mean normalized and raw volumes for each ROI are
shown in table 2. Differences between control and dementia
subjects are summarized in table 3, and between subjects
with DLB and other dementia subjects in table 4.

Measured volumes. Control subjects had larger normalized
whole-brain volumes compared with AD ( p < 0.01) and VaD ( p < 0.01),
but not DLB ( p = 0.919) patients. There was a trend
for DLB subjects to have larger
whole-brain volumes than those with AD ( p = 0.051) but
not VaD ( p = 0.106).

Ventricular volume was smaller in contrast compared to
all dementia groups ( p < 0.001).

There were no differences between dementia subjects.
There were no significant differences in normalized frontal
lobe volumes between control and dementia subjects.

Control subjects had larger normalized temporal lobe
volumes compared to all dementia groups ( p < 0.001).
Subjects with DLB had larger temporal lobe volumes compared
to those with AD (3.66 versus 3.22, p < 0.05).

Control subjects had larger hippocampi compared to all
dementia groups ( p < 0.001). Subjects with DLB had
larger hippocampi than those with AD ( p < 0.001), but not
VaD ( p = 0.107). AD subjects also had smaller hippocampi
than those with VaD ( p < 0.05).

Controls had larger amygdalae compared to subjects
with AD and VaD ( p < 0.001), but not DLB ( p = 0.273).
Subjects with DLB had larger left and right amygdalae
than those with AD ( p < 0.001).

Stepwise linear regression was used to examine the relationship
between hippocampal volume, the different dementia subtypes,
and factors that may influence brain
volume (age, gender, MMSE score, APOE-e4 status, or history
of hypertension). Significant variables were a diagnosis
of AD (Beta 5 -0.516, p < 0.01), MMSE score (Beta = 0.436,
p < 0.01), and a diagnosis of VaD (Beta = -0.311,
p < 0.01). Together these variables predicted 59% of the
variance (r2 = 0.592).

APOE-e4 and volumetric indices.There were no significant
differences in volumetric indices between e4-negative
and -positive subjects for all dementia groups. Within each
dementia group, there were no significant differences in
age, duration of illness and cognitive impairment between
e4-negative and -positive subjects. In addition, APOE-e4
status did not predict atrophy for any volumetric indices in
dementia subjects using linear regression.

Discussion.This study examined MRI volumetric
differences in subjects with DLB, AD, VaD, and normal
subjects. Subjects with DLB had significantly
larger temporal lobe, hippocampal, and amygdala
volumes than those with AD, with a trend toward
larger whole-brain volumes. Overall, there were no
significant volumetric differences between subjects
with DLB and VaD and in frontal lobe volumes between
all subjects. Total ventricular volumes were
nonspecifically increased in all subjects with dementia.
Atrophy was not associated with presence of
APOE-e4.

The strengths of this study included the recruitment
of community-based elderly subjects with latelife
dementia, with comparable age, sex, education,
and duration of illness. Volumetric differences between
groups were therefore unlikely to be related to
differences in age or gender. A potential criticism of
this study would be the reliance on clinical, rather
than pathologic, diagnoses. However, as previously
discussed6clinical diagnoses were made after detailed
assessments and in accordance with standardized criteria.

A major finding of this study was that subjects
with DLB had significantly larger whole-temporal
lobes, hippocampi, and amygdalae than those with
AD. This is consistent with and further extends our
previous observation using visual rating of medial
temporal lobe atrophy in the same sample. A similar
pattern of differential hippocampal atrophy in AD
and DLB has been reported,4although the volume
loss in dementia subjects was less extensive; in addition,
there was no difference in amygdala volume.
These discrepancies need to be explored further, but
may reflect variations in methodology and sample
selection, as our subjects were an average of 4 to 5
years older, had had dementia for a longer period,
and had lower MMSE scores.

Importantly, the differential pattern of temporal
lobe atrophy in DLB and AD during life is consistent
with autopsy studies. The convergence of findings
suggest that in the differentiation of DLB from AD,
the preservation of temporal lobe structures, especially
the hippocampus, is supportive of a clinical
diagnosis of DLB. Pathologically, this may be explained
by the relative absence of AD-type pathology
in DLB, especially neurofibrillary tangles.

All three dementia groups had more extensive
temporal lobe and hippocampal atrophy when compared
with age-matched controls. In relation to AD,
this is highly consistent with well-established findings
and may relate to the extent of tangle pathology.
Previous studies have also reported
increased atrophy of temporal lobe structures in both
subjects with Lewy body pathology and VaD
when compared with normal controls. The pathologic
basis of these findings is less clear. Further neuropathologic
studies are necessary in order to clarify
the relationship, if any, between concurrent AD-type
pathology and temporal lobe atrophy on MRI in subjects
with DLB and VaD. It would be important to
determine whether MTA in life is a marker of AD-type
pathology not only in AD, but also in other disorders
where comorbid processes may be interacting.
Measures of global atrophy demonstrated significant
enlargement of ventricles in dementia subjects
compared with control subjects. Patients with DLB,
however, had relatively well-preserved whole-brain
parenchyma volume. Autopsy studies indicating relative
preservation of synapse integrity and neuronal
counts in subjects with DLB may explain this
relative conservation of overall brain volume.

Frontal lobe volumes were similar in all three dementia
groups. In relation to DLB and AD, this replicates
the finding of autopsy reports and our
MRI pilot study using a different cohort of subjects.
As such, the results did not confirm previous reports
of an association between frontal lobe atrophy and
Lewy body pathology although once again, comparisons
between studies are complicated by differences
in methodology, patient selection, and the
relative small number of subjects.

There were no significant differences in frontal
lobe volumes between control and dementia subjects.
This may reflect the limitations of our measurement,
which was restricted to the anterior third of the frontal
lobe. Alternatively, it could indicate that changes
in frontal lobe volume are a relatively normal feature
of successful aging, or that in subjects with dementia
atrophy may only emerge at a late stage in the progression
of the illness. This could account for the
discrepancies between ante mortem and post mortem
studies noted above.

Overall, we observed no MRI volumetric differences
between DLB and VaD. This suggests other
structural changes, in particular cerebral infarcts,
possibly in conjunction with white matter changes,
are likely to be more useful in discriminating these
conditions. Given that subjects with VaD performed
better on tests of cognitive function, it raises the possibility
that differences in neurochemical substrates may
underlie the cognitive impairment in DLB.
The role of APOE in the pathogenesis of dementias
remains to be determined. In particular, studies
examining the relationship between the APOE-e4 allele
and neuroimaging changes have so far produced
contrasting findings. Our results accord with
those of Jack et al., as we found no association between
volumetric indices and the presence of the
APOE-e4 allele. Further, this finding was observed
in subjects with AD as well as those with DLB and
VaD. Although still controversial, this finding suggests
atrophic processes are not directly linked to the
presence of APOE-e4 allele.

There is a growing body of evidence from both in
vivo MRI and autopsy studies to suggest that the
consensus criteria for DLB1should be modified to
emphasize the relative preservation of temporal lobe
structures in DLB compared with AD.