Patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD), the most common
neurodegenerative movement disorder, are at high
risk for the development of dementia. Incidence rates for
dementia range from 4.2 to 9.5% per year. The prevalence
of dementia in PD ranges from 10 to 30%. Thus,
PD with dementia may represent the second most common
cause of dementia after Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Dementia in PD is associated with a high risk of nursing
home placement and death. Early intervention in PD
patients who are at risk for dementia would be ideal, but
accurate diagnosis and prediction is necessary.

Prediction of dementia is imperfect. Incidence studies
have identified risk factors, which include older age,
male gender, longer duration of symptoms, specific aspects
of cognitive dysfunction (e.g., decreased verbal
fluency) and axial motor impairment (which responds
poorly to dopaminergic treatment). A structural or functional
neuroimaging marker might complement other
clinical and neuropsychological predictors.
Two previous studies demonstrated that hippocampal
atrophy is evident in PD with or without dementia.
Similar findings are observed in dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB), where diffuse Lewy bodies and,
in many cases, the pathologic features of AD cooccur.
These changes overlap with those seen in
PD with dementia (PDD), but DLB is distinguished
by overlapping onset of dementia and parkinsonism
within 12 months along with hallucinations
and fluctuations. Except for fluctuations, none of the
core features are distinctive for DLB. Visual hallucinations,
for example, are common in PD, especially in
patients with coexistent dementia, highlighting the
clinical overlap of DLB and PDD.

We sought to confirm that hippocampal atrophy was
evident in an independent sample of patients with PD
with very mild cognitive impairment or dementia compared
with healthy elderly and non-demented PD using
whole-brain volumetric imaging. Specifically, we examined
hippocampal and extrahippocampal regions to discern
if the pattern of atrophy differed between PD and
AD. Based on previous work, we hypothesized that hippocampal
atrophy would be present at an early stage in
older patients with PD, but would be of lesser severity
than that seen in AD. Furthermore, we predicted that the
pattern of atrophy would differ between PDD and AD.

SUBJECTS AND METHODS

Subjects

Subjects were recruited from the Parkinson Center of
Oregon Movement Disorders Clinic, the Oregon Aging
and Alzheimer Disease Clinic, and the Oregon Brain
Aging Study. Parkinson’s disease was defined by the
presence of two signs among resting tremor, rigidity, and
bradykinesia, consistent with the UK Brain Bank criteria.
Parkinson’s disease with dementia patients required
a diagnosis of PD to have preceded the diagnosis
of dementia or cognitive impairment by at least one year.
This information was collected by history obtained from
an informant, and was used to operationally exclude
DLB cases where dementia and parkinsonism occurred
within one year.

Dementia was defined according to DSM-IV criteria.
Cognitive impairment was staged using the Clinical Dementia
Rating Scale (CDR), which has been used previously
in staging dementia in PD. A rating of 0.5, termed
questionable or very mild dementia, indicates persistent
memory impairment, or mild cognitive or functional
change, representing a change from a previous level of
function and was the minimal criterion for cognitive impairment.
Some patients at this stage may not meet strict
criteria for dementia in that functional decline was not
required for the present study. Nevertheless, all cognitively
impaired and demented PD patients were referred to as
PDD. Higher stages on the CDR represent more severe
dementia: 1, mild dementia; 2, moderate dementia; 3, severe
dementia. Those with AD met criteria for probable AD
according to the NINCDS-ADRDA.

Methods used for the Oregon Brain Aging Study, a
longitudinal study of healthy aging, have been described
previously. All patients and controls underwent an interview
with an informant that was used to provide
information to diagnose dementia and obtain a CDR
staging. Cognitive testing was used as supportive evidence
for cognitive impairment. All non-demented PD
patients and controls had no persistent cognitive or functional
complaints or cognitive problems reported by the
patient or the informant.

Behavioral–Cognitive Assessment

Twenty PD patients had cognitive and motor assessments.
Three additional PD patients were recruited and
assessed, but the scans could not be analyzed for technical
reasons. Their data was not included in this report.
Baseline cognitive abilities were characterized by the
Wide-Range Achievement Test–Reading, version 2
(WRAT-R2). The Mini-Mental State Examination
(MMSE) was carried out with all subjects. Depression
was assessed in the PD patients and controls using the
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Behavioral problems
were documented using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory
(NPI). Cognitive assessments carried out for
the PD patients included the CERAD word list recall and
recognition test.

Controls and patients with AD were assessed as de-
scribed previously and were age, gender and dementia
severity (CDR) matched to the PD subject from a pool of
available MRI scans. Cognitive tests reported represent
those administered to subjects in all groups.

Motor Assessment

Standard clinical assessments were used to rate
tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, gait, and balance. The
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) was
used to rate PD patients who entered the study. This was
only available for the PD patients. None of the control
subjects and AD patients exhibited parkinsonism
clinically.

MR Imaging

MRI scans were obtained on a 1.5-Tesla GE scanner,
with the following image parameters: multi-echo, multi-
planar, 4-mm coronal slices, 24-cm2 FOV, 256 x 256
matrix, NEX = 0.5, TR = 3000 msec, TE = 30 and 80
msec as described previously. Image analysis was carried
out by semiautomated recursive segmentation using
the program REGION, and by manual tracing using NIH
Image v. 1.5 on Macintosh computers. Total pixel counts
for each region were summed for each slice and multiplied
by the slice thickness to convert areas to volumes.
Hippocampal and parahippocampal volumes were measured
by manually tracing the hippocampal areas on
serial slices located between the red nucleus and the
superior colliculus as described previously. Intracranial
(suparatentorial) volume was defined as non-bone pixels
beginning with the first slice in which the frontal poles
were present and ending at the occipital poles; excluding
brainstem and cerebellar structures. Intracranial volumes
were determined by recursive segmentation using REGION.
In this semiautomated program, representative
pixels of tissue types of interest (bone, brain, and
cerebrospinal fluid) are sampled on each slice using
predetermined sampling guidelines. The recursive segmentation
is completed automatically by applying a discriminant
function to identify all non-bone pixels contiguous
to the intracranial sample points. Any manual
tracing required to correct the automated segmentation is
carried out according to strict atlas-based rules. Subsequent
segmentation allows measurement of brain and
cerebrospinal fluid in a similar manner. These analysis
techniques have been shown previously to be reliable:
hippocampal volume, intraclass correlation (ICC) =
0.90; parahippocampal volume, ICC = 0.81; temporal
lobe volume, ICC = 0.93; frontal lobe volume, ICC =
0.91; parieto-occipital lobe volume, ICC = 0.93; and
intracranial volume, ICC = 0.98. The sum of the right
and left hemisphere volumes was examined because we
did not hypothesize that hippocampal degeneration
would be lateralized.

Statistical Analysis

Groups were compared using X2 tests, t-tests or analysis
of variance (ANOVA) for direct comparisons and
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) for simultaneous
examination of all brain regions and cognitive
function; ANOVA and Fisher’s PLSD test were used for
post hoc comparisons. Total amount of levodopa (L-dopa)
equivalents were calculated for the patient groups
according to the formula: Total equivalents = regular
L-dopa dose x 1 + L-dopa continuous release dose x
0.75 + pramipexole dose x 67 + ropinirole dose x
16.67 + pergolide dose x 100 + bromocriptine dose x

10 + [regularL-dopa dose + (continuous releaseL-dopa
dose x 0.75)] x 0.25 if taking tolcapone or entecapone
Untransformed raw data are presented in the
tables. Although there was no significant group difference
in intracranial volume (ICV), groups were compared
after dividing the volume by the intracranial volume
as described previously. To assure that the disease
group differences were not related to the statistically
insignificant increased number of males in the cognitively
intact PD group, analyses were repeated after
excluding that group. Right and left hemisphere volumes
were combined for all between-group comparisons because
we did not hypothesize that one side would be
more likely to be associated with cognitive impairment;
moreover, right and left hippocampal volumes did not
differ from each other (t = 0.61, P = 0.55). Correlation
between memory and MMSE scores and left and right
hippocampal volumes were examined among the patients
with PD to determine if cognitive function might be
associated specifically with focal hippocampal atrophy
and to test the hypothesis that verbal memory would be
associated with left and not right hippocampal atrophy.
Post hoc ANCOVA comparing directly the AD and PDD
was carried out, after adjusting for MMSE, to determine
if dementia severity might account for any trend in
parahippocampal volumes observed. Effect sizes were
calculated for each of the patient groups by subtracting
the mean brain volume in the disease group from the
mean volume in the control group and then dividing by
the overall standard deviation. A P value of 0.05 was
used for as the threshold for statistical significance.

RESULTS

Data regarding the baseline characteristics of the subjects
are presented in Table 1. Groups were matched for
age and education. Although there were more men in the
PD without cognitive impairment, there was no statistically
significant difference in gender distribution between
groups (X2 = 0 5.1, P = 0.16). Years since onset
of symptoms differed between patient groups (F[2,28] =
7.5, P = 0.003); PDD patients had a longer duration of
symptoms than both the AD (P = 0.0006) and the
non-demented PD patients (P = 0.04). No subjects had
clinical depression and the GDS did not differ between
groups (F[3,29] = 1.55, P = 0.22). By definition, only
the cognitively impaired groups were rated >0 according
to the CDR (for PDD, n = 7, CDR = 0.5; n = 2, CDR =1;
n = 1, CDR = 2; for AD, n = 6, CDR = 0.5; n = 4,
CDR = 1; n = 1, CDR = 2). Non-impaired PD and
controls had a CDR = 0. As expected, the CDR score
differed significantly between groups (F[3,38] = 20.6,
P < 0.0001); the demented groups differed from the
others, but not from each other (P = 0.50). There was no
difference between PD groups in totalL-dopa equivalent
use (PD = 560 mg/day and PDD = 568 mg/day, t = -0.07,
P = 0.95).

Results of available cognitive tests are shown in Table
2. A MANOVA that included the cognitive variables
(Education, WRAT-R2, MMSE score, word list recall,
and word list recognition), was significant: Wilks’s
y = 0.184, F(15,78) = 4.4, P < 0001. Post hoc tests revealed
that education level did not differ between groups
(F[3,32] = 0.26, P = 0.85). Premorbid cognitive ability,
measured by the WRAT-R2, differed between the groups
(F[3,32] = 8.9, P = 0.0002). The two PD groups did not
differ from each other (P = 0.46), but had lower
WRAT-R2 scores than the AD patients (P < 0.05, for
both) and controls (P < 0.005, for both). MMSE scores
differed between groups (F[3,32] = 6.46, P = 0.01).
Patients with PDD ( P < 0.05) and AD (P = 0.003) were
more impaired than the controls, whereas AD patients
(P = 0.01) were more impaired than the non-impaired
PD patients. There was no statistically significant differ-
ence between non-impaired PD and the PDD patients
(P = 0.17), the non-impaired PD patients and controls
(P = 0.52) and the AD and the PDD patients (P = 0.21).


Groups differed on the CERAD word list recall task
(F[3,32] = 10.3, P < 0.0001). PD groups did not
differ (P = 0.46) from each other, but both groups
performed significantly worse than controls (PD,
P = 0.02; PDD, P = 0.005). The AD patients had poorer
recall compared with the control (P < 0.0001) and PD
subjects (PD, P = 0.0005; PDD, P = 0.005). Differences
were also observed on the recognition format
(F[3,32] = 4.0, P = 0.005): the PDD (P = 0.02) and
AD ( P = 0.001) both performed worse than the
controls did, but did not differ from each other
(P = 0.19). The AD patients performed worse than did the
cognitively intact PD patients (P = 0.009), who did
not differ from the controls (P = 0.37). Only 6 AD
patients were available for these comparisons.

Groups did not differ significantly on the NPI
(F[3,18] = 1.6, P = 0.22), but few non-PD subjects
were available for comparison.

Raw MRI volumes and effect sizes are shown in Table
3. The overall MANOVA examining the corrected brain
volumes (hippocampal, parahippocampal, temporal,
frontal, and parieto-occipital) as dependent variables was
significant: Wilks’s y = 0.325, F(15,97) = 3.25,
P = 0.0002. Corrected hippocampal volumes differed between
groups (F[3,39] = 7.7, P = 0.0004): PD (P = 0.004),
PDD (P = 0.003), and AD (P < 0.0001) were smaller
than the controls, although these groups did not
differ from each other. Differences in adjusted parahippocampal
volumes were of borderline significance
(F[3,39] = 2.85, P = 0.05, see Fig. 1). Between-group
differences in corrected temporal (F[3,39] = 2.5,
P = 0.08), frontal (F[3,39] = 1.4, P = 0.24), parieto-occipital
lobe (F[3,39] = 2.7, P = 0.06), or total brain volumes
(F[3,39] = 1.9, P = 0.15) were not significant. Results
of the overall MANOVA remained similar after excluding
the non-impaired PD group (that included more
males, Wilks’s y = 0.351, F[10,52] = 3.5, P = 0.001).
After adjusting for MMSE, there was no significant
difference between the AD and PDD groups with respect
to parahippocampal volumes (F[1,17] = 0.21, P = 0.65).
Recognition memory (r = 0.54, P = 0.015) and
MMSE scores (r = 0.56, P = 0.01) correlated with left
hippocampal volume; right hippocampal correlations
were all insignificant (P > 0.2).

DISCUSSION

Our data confirm that PD patients with or without
cognitive impairment have more hippocampal atrophy
than healthy age-matched control subjects, with volumes
similar to that in patients with mild AD. Differences in
parahippocampal volumes were of borderline significance,
and trends observed were related to dementia
severity. Differences in temporal and frontal lobe volume
and parieto-occipital lobes were not significant in this
sample. Thus, hippocampal atrophy is evident in older
PD patients before the onset of dementia. Effect sizes
observed were modest for all comparisons, with a trend
for hippocampal atrophy of AD > PDD > PD, compared
with controls.

We have extended previous research by examining a
mild spectrum of disease using quantitative, whole brain
neuroimaging. Previous pathological and imaging based
volumetric studies that have examined more
advanced patients with PD are consistent with our study.
Hippocampal atrophy also occurs in DLB, which overlaps
pathologically with PDD, where hippocampal volume is
intermediate between that observed in controls
and in those with AD with sparing of the parahippocampal
gyrus.

Our study was limited by a small sample size, and by
the fact that the non-demented PD group was predominantly
male. Nevertheless, the difference in gender distribution
between groups was not significant statistically
and the other patient groups, including the PDD group,
were well matched. A larger intracranial volume in men
would bias against our finding of a decreased hippocampal
volume in PD, compared with controls, arguing that
this finding is valid. A greater number of men in the
cognitively intact PD group would bias toward finding
larger volumes in that group; however, we have adjusted
for intracranial capacity using accepted methods, and the
overall MANOVA remained significant after excluding
that group. Although we had a small sample size, our
current subjects were independent of those reported in
our pilot study that showed similar findings, and therefore
are confirmatory. Based on our pilot study, we
included a number of PD patients similar to those of
Laakso and associates.

In DLB the rate of brain atrophy does not differ from
that in AD or vascular dementia. In a comparison with
controls and patients with progressive supranuclear
palsy, patients with PD (on average 5 years younger than
those in our study) did not show hippocampal atrophy,
raising the possibility that atrophy is accelerated in PD.
A recent study demonstrated that cognitive decline was
correlated with global brain atrophy in PD. A previous
volumetric study of patients with PD suggested that
hippocampal atrophy might be correlated with episodic
memory, consistent with our finding of a relationship
between cognitive function and left hippocampal volume.
Given the high risk of dementia in people with
PD and the finding that atrophy precedes the onset of
dementia, our study raises the possibility that focal atrophy
might provide a presymptomatic marker for dementia
risk. Nevertheless, given that atrophy in both cognitively
impaired and unimpaired subjects was similar,
additional changes must be invoked to explain dementia
in PD.

One interpretation of the trend to larger parahippocampal
volumes in PDD is that the PDD subjects were
at a milder stage of disease. Given that, after adjustment
for MMSE, there was no clearly significant difference in
parahippocampal volumes between the AD and PDD
groups, it is likely that dementia severity accounts for
this finding. On the other hand, the PDD and AD groups
did not differ in the distribution of CDR levels or on the
MMSE, both of which reflect global cognitive function.
Although sparing of parahippocampal and temporal lobe
structures also has been noted in DLB compared with
AD in imaging studies, a recent pathological study
found that parahippocampal involvement with Lewy
body and neuritic pathology was associated with dementia
in patients with PD and DLB, consistent with involvement
of these regions in PDD. Involvement of the
subiculum was shown recently for DLB, but not PD,
suggesting that the pattern of atrophy might differ in
these two entities.

Our data examining cortical regions, including parieto-occipital
lobe volumes, are consistent with a recent
study that showed specific sparing of occipital volume in
DLB compared with AD and controls.48In our study, as
in many of the previous imaging studies, there was
considerable overlap between patient groups with respect
to each of the brain volumes examined (see Fig. 1).
Given our small sample size, we did not carry out subgroup
analyses to examine the possibility of clinical
heterogeneity.

In summary, we have shown that hippocampal atrophy
may distinguish PD from healthy controls. Hippocampal
changes resemble those seen in patients with mild AD
and may correlate with cognitive function. Prospective
studies will determine if this provides a presymptomatic
marker for dementia in PD and if the evolution of atrophy
in PD resembles that seen in other neurodegenerative
disorders. Ongoing research using higher resolution
MRI scans will allow further, more precise definition of
the pattern of brain atrophy, especially in the medial
temporal lobes. Pathological correlation with atrophy on
MRI will be required to determine if PDD is distinct
from DLB.
